---
title: Foo Fighters 1995
date: 2020-09-15 00:00 UTC
tags:
  - personal
  - rock
keywords:
  - personal
  - rock
  - Foo Fighters 
teaser: "My Foo Fighters Tweets."
---
[t]: https://twitter.com/dwfrank/status/1305724884052443136
[ll]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/La_Luna_(Portland,_Oregon)
[may]: https://www.foofighterslive.com/shows/13th-may-1995-la-luna-32
[july]: https://www.setlist.fm/setlists/foo-fighters-bd6893a.html

_A tweetstorm I wrote up in September, 2020, from being at a very early Foo Fighters' show. I've migrated this away from being embedded tweets because Twitter/X. I've kept it [linked][t] for history's sake. Refreshed with links and some text formatting. --dwf_ 

---

My Amazing Rock’n’Roll moments. Next in a series. 

Foo Fighters first tour. [May 13th, 1995][may] (or maybe the [July 24th show][july], I'm not sure[^1]). Portland, Oregon. [La Luna][ll]. An amazing venue that doesn’t do rock shows anymore. 

But an absolutely AMAZING mosh pit. Near the end of the show, the band took a short breather to change guitars or something. And we all stood there, spent.<br><br>Then they started “Exhausted.” But nobody was dancing. We were all too tired.

I was in the middle of the room at the edge of a big circle of people. I wanted to keep the excitement. After a 30 seconds or so, when the song is still slow, I tucked in my arms and started rolling slowly to the tempo off of everyone along the inside of the circle. 

Just me became two or three, then four people. Not crazy dancing, but just building. And building. Just like the song. By the crescendo we had the pit at full strength. That song felt like it went on forever. Just forever. It was so special.

Fast forward about 4 months. The tour is wrapping up. And I’m listening to a Westwood One radio interview with the band on a Sunday night. They start taking calls from the audience. “What was your favorite show during this tour?” 

Dave Grohl - “It’s just so great to be on tour. That we’ve picked up fans and they’ve embraced us. And the shows everywhere have been beyond what we’ve could have ever expected.” 

Then one of the other band members jumps in. “Remember that one night in Portland? When they started _moshing_? To f’n _Exhausted_ ? That never happens.” 

Dave - “Oh, yeah. So cool. By the end of the song that was _nuts_. What a show!”

[^1]: I think it was likely the May show, as I recall it being short. Regardless, it makes a better story with _Exhausted_ being the last song.
